Committee, we're in public session for just 10 minutes.
We have the Office of the Privacy Commissioner. Thank you for being here.
Liz MacPherson,
we'll hear from you for 10 minutes. That does include time for questions.
There always are one or two at least, so bear that in mind, and we'll
hand over to you now.
Kia ora koutou, and good afternoon.
I want to start by thanking you, Chair, for
accommodating our office schedule and for making time in your busy
timetable for us right now.
I'm Liz MacPherson, I'm the Deputy Privacy Commissioner.
With me, I have Eve Kennedy, who is our Policy Manager.
I'll address our written submission very quickly because you want to have some time
for questions.
I do, however, want to,
without repeating my written submission, I want to talk through a number of my
recommendations,
particularly as it relates to Clause 29.
So you will have noted in our submission that
we've focused on an ASA recommendation.
We recommend that the committee consider whether the proposals at Clause 29
are necessary in their current form.
Our preference is for existing information-sharing mechanisms to be used in
place of what is a broad desecration of the Privacy Act.
My main recommendation is for this work to be progressed via an approved
information sharing agreement or an ASA.
Part seven of the Privacy Act provides a legislative vehicle for agencies to
share information via an ASA, and an ASA requires
safeguards to apply to protect the privacy of individuals and to ensure that
any interference with their privacy is minimized.
Now, I've seen in the RIS that ASAs were seen to
be overly burdensome and time-consuming.
My submission references an ASA that was developed, consulted on, and issued
within six months. And I also referenced an ASA that is in
force that includes 12 agencies,
and I identified these to illustrate that an ASA can be done
relatively quickly and include many agencies, including the private
sector, which is what Clause 29 is proposing.
The time an ASA takes primarily hinges on having a clear problem definition and
appropriate resourcing, and I note that this current mechanism is intended
to be used to create agreements with a potentially very wide
range of recipients for a wide range of purposes.
And we as an office are concerned it would lead to excessively broad
information sharing.
Although I note that MB has attempted to manage the privacy risk by including
consultation with our office.
The benefits of an ASA, though, are broader than just the privacy safeguards.
It requires ministerial oversight, consultation with interested parties,
cabinet approval, and provides an opportunity for the commissioner
to make a submission to the relevant minister on the privacy implications.
Now, I've provided a number of amendments if the committee is minded to
retain Clause 29 in the bill,
and these seek to place stronger privacy protections and
oversight into the information sharing agreements.
Some of these
recommended protections mirror those I'd expect to see in an ASA, and I'm really
happy to take any questions on those.
I did want to make one
comment on clauses 26 and
27.
You will have noted that my submission was focused on Clause 29, and
that was given Clause 29 facilitates what I consider
to be en masse information sharing with a broad range of
agencies, and the scale of information sharing was significant, hence my
focus.
However, having had the opportunity to reflect on other submissions made on the
bill,
I do share concerns about the changes to clauses
26 and 27, and in particular,
I share the concerns raised by the Law Society.
I'm happy to talk about that
as well. But other than that,
we're here to take your questions.
Right. Brilliant. My first question's from Phil Twyford.
So you've been
part of what sounds like a pretty extensive consultation prior to the
drafting of the bill.
Mm-hmm.
You set out a very clear critique of the principles
analysis of the bill.
Why do you think,
based on all that you know, why do you think
the government is going ahead with these provisions
in spite of your--
Presumably you gave similar input in the consultation.
Uh-
What-- How would you characterize the view? Do you have a sense of it?
Well,
I think primarily the focus of the bill is on
improving the efficiency of the compliance by
immigration.
Mm.
That is what we have been informed.
Yeah, to add to that,
we know that officials have found approved information sharing agreements
time-consuming,
and I guess to Liz's points earlier, that does reflect that
there needs to be a process followed to kind of identify what the problem is that
the sharing agreement is intended to solve.
And from our perspective, the proposals in Clause 29 kind of
move that decision-making to the front end and remove that requirement to have a
really clear problem definition for the information sharing up front before
the authority is in place.
But did you tell them, as you have in this document, that the
effect of this bill is to set up a parallel and
much weaker and less accountable-...
regime that effectively circumvents the law with
privacy?
We certainly advised them that there was in
existence already a regime that would allow them to
achieve their purposes with built-in privacy safeguards.
Mm.
Thank you. Next question from Pavneet Parmar.
Thank you. So we're very keen to understand a bit more
about your recommendation you have made to define
information related harm.
Mm-hmm.
And just want to understand, are you thinking that there should be some particular
kinds of harm that should be put under this
definition? Or are you thinking that there should be some kind of
threshold before information could be shared?
If you could make me understand a bit more about your
recommendation to define that.
Mm.
Our concern is that it is undefined, it is extremely
broad.
And so
without thresholds, it's very difficult for the officers
involved to actually put it into practice.
What we'd like to see is a definition of what
information related harm actually means, but in particular, that
clarity of threshold.
And I think once, as we said in our recommendation, once the
committee has been provided with
a definition,
then I think you need to ask the officials whether there are actually
additional safeguards that need to be put in place
based on the nature of that definition.
Do you have anything?
Yeah, just note, so sharing or creating an information sharing agreement
under Clause 29
for information related harms is one of the purposes for which information will be
able to be shared with non-government organizations.
Mm.
And so ensuring that there is a kind of consistent
understanding with those agencies,
could be banks, could be telcos, could be any range of
non-government organizations, so that they have a clear understanding of what
the boundaries are.
There are really good reasons why that information sharing might need to take
place, so we understand that.
Fraud and identity theft-
Mm-hmm
... are some of what officials are considering in that purpose.
But
just making sure that there is
some safeguard and clarity about what that boundary is, we think is
necessary.
Just very quickly on threshold, do you have any views on what that
threshold should be?
Like national security, or very serious
threat, or just reasonable belief.
What's in your mind kind of when you talk about threshold?
Well, the sharing arrangements with NGOs in particular,
the
categories are either national security or this information
related harm. So within information related harm, yes, we would like
to see some threshold that
essentially does have it related to the more serious end of
the spectrum.
Okay. Thank you.
And question from Ricardo Menendez.
Yeah, two quick questions. In layman's terms, what would you see some
of the risks or harm associated with the information sharing powers as they
stand right now? What do you see could be some of the outcomes that could result in
harm
to members of the community?
From a Privacy Act perspective, transparency is really important so
that individuals can understand what information is being shared about them and
what that impact might be. I guess our concern is that
facilitating broad information sharing agreements with a
large range of agencies, undefined or
purpose driven rather than a specified list under the bill,
will probably erode some of the transparency that currently
exists for individuals.
And the other point I'd make is that the Privacy Act, the part of
the role of transparency is about making sure that individuals have an opportunity
to have input into decisions that affect them, and so that's why that
transparency is really important.
So removing the individual from being in the loop by
facilitating sharing from agency to agency does remove that
ability for people to correct wrong information before decisions are
made about them, for example.
And on your concerns relating to Clause 26, would you mind just
expanding on potentially what you see could be some of the
harms or unintended consequences?
I know you referenced one of the submitters-
Mm-hmm
... but in your words, what problems do you have with it?
Again, it is the ability to collect a broad
range of information. So we're talking about moving
into from a
likely to a may. We're also involving
visa holders, looking into visa holders.
What we're talking about when we talk about immigration information is highly
sensitive information, and the communities that are involved
are often vulnerable. And
the jurisdictions that they come from, the
systems involved may involve a degree of corruption.
So some of the rationale or evidence that we've been given
for why this is necessary
suggests that
you might wish to
be able to secure the identity information from an individual because they
are not looking at the officer, they're looking down. They're looking shifty.
These things are things that we need to take into consideration when
we're considering vulnerable communities.
Thank you very much for your participation in the process.
Obviously, your written submission, very constructive and being here today as well,
so appreciate it.
Thank you.
And we'll move now into private session briefly, committee